---
layout: post
title:  "Summer Bikepacking 2023: Paris-Amsterdam"
date:   2023-08-20 07:41:24 +0200
---

Every year since 2020 me and 2 of my friends (Katya and Stas) go for a multi-day bikepacking trip. It started in July 2020 with via Rhone (Lyon-Montpellier), continued with Lausanne-Genoa, Munich-Venice. This year we basically ran out of classic routes that would've been more challenging. I was long time thinking of bikepacking with a tent, but guys have been sceptical about it. But this year they have offered it themselves, and also we decided to go for a 1000-km (one megameter :D) tour. We ended up with a route Paris-Amsterdam, following part of [La Seine a Velo](https://www.laseineavelo.com/) and [Eurovelo 4](https://en.eurovelo.com/ev4).

We've started our planing a few month prior to the tour. Main difference from the previous tours has been the distance of the starting location from all of us, so we had to solve a logistical task of delivering bicycles to Paris. Also, such a tour requires a rather thorough and careful planning of accomodations (we all don't really like surprises on the way). We've ended up with the following stops: Paris - Notre-Dame-de-l'Isle - Rouen - Fecamp - Eu-Triport - Calais - Brugge - Stellendam - Leiden - Amsterdam. It's roughly 120 km per day, with small to moderate amount of climb per day. Fecamp, Eu, Brugge and Stellendam have been stops in the camp sites.

For me the most stressful day has been obviously day 1. I had a lot of skydiving activities prior to the day of the tour, so I actually had to have my bicycle packed 8 days before the start of the tour. I've decided to use cardboards to carry the bicycle to Paris. Guys have used Flixbus, but they could spend a few days in Paris. I was very tight in terms of available time. The airline I used allowed to carry the bicycle together with all bags on it, as long as it fits into 280 cm in sum of dimensions and doesn't exceed 23 kg. Btw, it was the only time when I had to use a raincoat - it was very cold and rainy in Munich on the starting day.

There have been no problems at all, except for the fact that carrying 1.6 meters long and 23-kg heavy box to the S-Bahn is very hard. In the airport I also faced no issues (but I had to inform the airline beforehand that I'd replace my regular luggage with the bicycle box, if this is done - there is no additional charge for the bicycle).

In the Paris I have received my box back. It was apparent that it was dropped multiple times, and I haven't managed to secure my rear derailleur properly. So they've bent it, unfortunately. Spoiler: it's been the only damage for the bicycle until the end of the tour.

The last challenge of the day has been the carton box. I had to get rid of it in the airport. Apparently it's not easy to find a paper trash can in the airport. I've asked a local worker where I could move it, he just pointed somewhere outside. So with this gesture the responsibility of handling the box has been taken away from me, and I really left the box next to a trash can outside of airport. The rest of the path to the gathering point has been easy - 2 trains and 19 km of cycling. I could've been unlucky though - the train station that connects Paris-Orly with Paris has just reopened few days prior. Paris (apparently) prepares itself for the Olympic games, and there is a lot of construction works going on. 

Around 11:30-12:00 we've met with Katya and Stas. This was the point where I've learned that Katya has recently damaged her knee, and the whole tour for her is in a big question. The speed on the route hasn't been high on that day, it was comparable to the first day of Lyon-Montpellier. We had a few gravel roads on the way, some navigation challenges, which always reduces your average speed. One thing that was pissing off a lot were the speed bumps - we had a lot of those on the first day. It severely damages the contact point of the butt. 

Around 3PM we've stopped at a supermarket for a short lunch break. Again, few Lyon-Montpellier flashbacks - when you've made 50km, you still have 90 to go, and you have like 6 hours of light day left. If we would've kept the same pace until the end of day, we would have had to cycle in the darkness (which is far from comfortable).

At the end of the day (and before the sunset) we've reached our stay. It was a house hosted by a very nice man, who has also offered us a dinner (for rather good money). We've taken the bags off the bike, had a quick shower, and headed to the dinner (I think it started around 10PM). It was a great dinner, consisting of several dishes and a great wine (again Lyon-Montpellier, honey flashbacks). We've finished around 23:30, completely wasted. I'm very grateful to the owner of the house for such a warm greeting and for the patience (as we were there much later than we anticipated).

Day 2 must have been much easier. It was supposed to be "easy", although eventually it wasn't much shorter - 95 km with quite a bit of climb. We still had the speed bumps, and there have been very few towns on the way (so it could've been a challenge to find a place to stop for a lunch). Overall it was a good day, with nice view on Senna river. We arrived relatively early at Rouen, in order to have a short walk in the city. The meme of the day was the bed in the closet - it was really stored there, and in order to lay it down, we had to take a table out of the way, so there was almost no space left in the room.

Day 3 has been the day when we had to say "goodbye" to Senna and head towards the Atlantic ocean. It included 2 ferries and a bit of a climb in the second half of the day. I also had an impression that we had less bumps on the way, and the average speed has been a bit higher. In general, I can't say a lot about the road. The most exciting (both in good and bad ways) and interesting part has been the Fecamp. The camping we've chosen appeared to be on the hill, on a very steep hill. I've failed to climb it, as exactly at this point my derailleur started failing under the load. At the entrance of the camping (after a climb) we've figured out, that the reception is on top of the hill. Me and Stas went to the reception, and all we've figured out was the fact that we were late - reception has closed a few hours ago. We still have managed to call them (fortunately, Katya and Stas speak french and can solve this kind of issues efficiently). We came back to Katya and all together headed to our tenting location. There have been 2 other bikepackers, so we had to move them slightly from our site (but we still had enough space for everyone). We've managed to order pizza and coke and celebrated the end of the day with a beautiful sunset over the ocean.

Day 4 has been the first day when Katya had to use a public transport. After packing tents and things, we've headed towards Fecamp center, where we've figured out that it's possible to carry a bike on the bicycle. It's a pure luck in France - some busses allow the bicycles to be carried, and some do not. In this region busses have been equipped with bike racks (although eventually Katya has used the luggage compartment). Me and Stas headed towards Eu. On the way we've met Jaroslav from Slovakia. Crazy guy, he also was bikepacking, but in a much more lightweight mode and was making 170 km per day. We've stopped at an airfield, to look at the jet monument, talk a bit to the pilots and have a coke. The amazing part of this part of route is that you cycle in 1 km from the coast, but you don't even notice it, as on your side there is a rather long field, which ends up in a 50-100m wall that drops all the way down to ocean. Katya had one bus change, we caught up with her at the bus stop, and continued on to Dieppe, where we continued all together. 

Campsite this time has been not so much elevated. We've set up the tents, had showers, a bier and headed to the town nearby. Btw, no taxi in this town, so you have a limited choice - you either walk or don't :D We've been late - all kitchens have already been closed, so we had to order pizzas. At least these were available. 

Day 5 has started with a beautiful sunrise. We had to wake up early, as it was the hardest day of the tour. We also had to search for a solution on how to get Katya to Calais. She'd unable to make the 145 km / 1 km elevation gain ride. The worst part was the absence of good public transport for bicycles in that area. Eventually we've found a compromise - Katya could ride with us 41 km to Noyelles-sur-Mer, from where she could make it to Calais on a direct train. There we left her at the train station and went for a quick lunch. After that we kicked off at a rather high (at least for me) pace.

Further ride of the day was neither exciting nor with a lot of sights. We were supposed to ride along the coast, but in that particular place the route along the coast was curving a lot, and it was turning into 165 km with 1km of elevation gain. This was too much for us to handle, so we decided to cut the corner and saved 20km that day. 

Probably the coolest thing of that day was a very hospitable dude at the camping, we called him "A Pirate", he really looked like one. Also, at one point we saw the famous windsurfers that are using the sand to ride on it (so it's a cart, no engine, with a sail).

Katya has managed to arrived waay before us (luckily there is a train that goes along the coast in that part of Normandy). She took some of their clothes to a washer. I went to wash clothes after arrival too. Btw, we had to think carefully if we wanted to split, as guys were in the phone roaming and I was not. Eventually we've all ended up with washed clothes (I ran out of all my clothes completely at that point in time).

Next morning we had a nice breakfast, organized by our Airbnb host. The funniest part of the morning was, for sure, drying of the clothes, as they, of course, haven't dried overnight. At some point we finally went on the bikes and headed towards the seaside first. Guys were hoping to see Britain (this was the clothest point between Britain and Europe). I was quite sure that the current humidity wouldn't let us do that (I was right). Also a deal with Maxime to meet in Dunqirque was complicating it a bit, especially given that the morning gathering took us forever. After the sightseeing on the coast (the Dragon on Calais coast is impressive) we've headed towards Dunqerque. 

That day (day 6) we were VERY lucky - we had a very strong tailwind. Windsock on one of the airfields on the way was literally standing, fortunately in the direction of our tour. At one point we've managed to meet Maxime, and from that point we went all together. 

There was one ferry that day, too. A very small one in the middle of a town. We saw a few large kytes behind buildings, some of them looked like dementors from HP - that was impressive.

Even despite the final ease of the ride (tailwind + no more ascent/descent), 1-2 dozen kilometers prior to Brugge (we were camping again on that day) Katya's knee left the chat, so we slowed down. Unfortunately, she couldn't apply any momentum on the pedals. About 20 minutes prior to the camping we decided to split slightly - I stayed with Katya, Maxime and Stas went to the camping (mostly to make sure they arrive in time and it's not closed on our arrival). We've arrived, and apparently it's been a camping only for the tents - no Wohnmobilen, and it was full. No, it was FULL. We had small tents, so it wasn't an issue for us to find something, but it was very-very stuffed. The funniest part of this camping was the shower - you could have a shower under the sky - it doesn't have a roof and one wall is like 1.6m high - so you can also see a lake. 

After setting up tents and all cleanings we went to Brugge (center was like 4 km away). We decided to stick to taxi on that day, nobody had a mood to drive bicycles more at night on that day. We had a nice walk in the town center, it's quite pretty. Eventually we found a place where Stas finally could try the mussels that he was dreaming of the last few days. 

Next day we went throught city center again (for a breakfast this time), and with gained calories and coffeine we could continue our journey. Katya's knee was going through its worst, so we've tried to find a bus for her. We failed, so we decided to split - Stas started towing Katya, and we with Maxime went to the ferry to see how it works and to figure out whether we need to buy tickets beforehand/hurry/ do something else. Eventually nothing like that was required. We still had a bit of cross/tailwind, with a headwind for the last 4 km (winds were significant on that day). 

The ferry was quite nice, with a special parking part for the bicycles, where you could tie a bicycle. Ferry took about half an hour, and after disembarging  we went for a nearest restaraunt with good reviews. I was quite astonished that from there on it felt like everything is strictly optimized for the bicycles (so this restaraunt, for example, had a rain-protected parking for bikes). After a good lunch we've put Katya onto a bus and went in a 3-way.

We've even tried the towing with changes of the leader. I was managing to bearly give 34 km/h, whereas Maxime and Stas were pulling at 39 km/h. Crazy! I think we had like 3 dams on that day, infinite amount of windmills, crazy amount of cyclists - and guys who cosplayed the cars from Fast and Furious 1 (we saw some Skylines and Supras).

Katya, after arriving at her final stop, has started going towards our campsite. We haven't reached her eventually, the distance between us kept between 3-5 km, and we met almost at the camping (at the town of Stellendam). 

Camping was quite different, it was more like an area organized in 90-degrees angled ways, with green walls. There was one spot for small tents, and we went there. 

This was the time when I've learned what a sloth line is - it's a rope that you stretch between trees/poles, and put your things to dry on them, so that sloth don't climb on your things. It was first time I saw it, so it was going into the category TIL.

Unfortunately, this camping was veery remote, so we had no choice, but to go to the only restaraunt in the area by bikes. it was like 5 km away, deep in an industrial zone. The food was nice, but the main attraction was a family of spiders that occupied a corner of the restaraunt.

Next day we've headed towards the 3 big Holland cities: Rotterdam, Delft, Hague. We've split again, although Katya could cycle this day herself. I was going with Maxime, and apparently it's a great setup - we could go very fast along the Holland's great cycleways, mostlye straight and flat. I personally was impressed with the enormous size of the Rotterdam port. Also on that day we've got stuck behind a bridge that had to lift up and let a rather big container ship to pass the bridge.

In the Rotterdam we've been caught by surprise with an underwater tunnel for cyclists, it was quite not obvious that it was actually a tunnel. Then we had a great route through the Rotterdam city center, chose a restaraunt where (as we hoped) Stas and Katya would've stayed happy, and started with drinks. A half an hour later they also joined us. 

After the lunch we've headed towards Haag. We also went through Delft, although it was so stuffed that it  may've been a good idea to go around it. In the Hague Katya and Stas went for a short walk, and we've headed towards ourm Airbnb stay, to use our time and dry the tents from the days before a bit. The final stint was so amazing, there is literally a bicycle-highway from Hague to Leiden.

The stay was a bit away from the nearest restaraunts, although much closer than the day before, so we decided to walk there. 

On the last day we've headed first to the coast, where we had a proper breakfast, and from there we have splitted again. I have really enjoyed the beginning of that day, we were going in the Dunes next to Zandvoort. For me it was also cool that we could cycle along Zandvoort Racing Circuit, which was hosting an F1 Gran Pri a week after. Eventually me and Maxime have ended up in the West Amsterdam about 1/2 hour earlier than guys (they also had a puncture on the way), where we've found a place to have a meal (it was after about 50 km of cycling that day, usually it's a good time to eat).

Afterwards we've headed towards our hotel (which was in the south-west part of the city). We were going through rather crowded areas, and it's been a huge relief when we finally escaped it and went on the good routes with high speeds. When we've arrived at the spot, Stas told "Our GPX ends here. We have arrived". These are probably the best words you can hear after such a long tour. 
